But we say that whoever of you stays here, seeing how we administer justice and how we govern the state in other respects, has thereby entered into an agreement with us to do what we command;
and we say that he who does not obey does threefold wrong, because he disobeys us who are his parents, because he disobeys us who nurtured him, and because after agreeing to obey us he neither obeys us nor convinces us that we are wrong, though we give him the opportunity and do not roughly order him to do what we command, but when we allow him a choice of two things, either to convince us of error or to do our bidding, he does neither of these things.”
“We say that you, Socrates, will be exposed to these reproaches, if you do what you have in mind, and you not least of the Athenians but more than most others.”
If then I should say, “How so?” perhaps they might retort with justice that I had made this agreement with them more emphatically than most other Athenians.
For they would say, “Socrates, we have strong evidence that we and the city pleased you;
for you would never have stayed in it more than all other Athenians if you had not been better pleased with it than they;
you never went out from the city to a festival, or anywhere else, except on military service, and you never made any other journey, as other people do, and you had no wish to know any other city or other laws, but you were contented with us and our city.
So strongly did you prefer us and agree to live in accordance with us;
and besides, you begat children in the city, showing that it pleased you.
And moreover even at your trial you might have offered exile as your penalty, if you wished, and might have done with the state's consent what you are now undertaking to do without it.
But you then put on airs and said you were not disturbed if you must die, and you preferred, as you said, death to exile.
And now you are not ashamed to think of those words and you do not respect us, the laws, since you are trying to bring us to naught;
and you are doing what the meanest slave would do, since you are trying to run away contrary to the compacts and agreements you made with us that you would live in accordance with us.
First then, answer this question, whether we speak the truth or not when we say that you agreed, not in word, but by your acts, to live in accordance with us.”
What shall we say to this, Crito?
Must we not agree that it is true?
Crito.
We must, Socrates.
Socrates.
“Are you then,” they would say, “not breaking your compacts and agreements with us, though you were not led into them by compulsion or fraud, and were not forced to make up your mind in a short time, but had seventy years, in which you could have gone away, if we did not please you and if you thought the agreements were unfair?
But you preferred neither Lacedaemon nor Crete, which you are always saying are well governed, nor any other of the Greek states,or of the foreign ones, but you went away from this city less than the lame and the blind and the other cripples.
So much more than the other Athenians were you satisfied with the city and evidently therefore with us, its laws;
for who would be pleased with a city apart from its laws?
And now will you not abide by your agreement?
You will if you take our advice, Socrates;
and you will not make yourself ridiculous by going away from the city.
“For consider.
By transgressing in this way and committing these errors, what good will you do to yourself or any of your friends?
For it is pretty clear that your friends also will be exposed to the risk of banishment and the loss of their homes in the city or of their property.
And you yourself, if you go to one of the nearest cities, to Thebes or Megara — for both are well governed — will go as an enemy, Socrates, to their government, and all who care for their own cities will look askance at you, and will consider you a destroyer of the laws, and you will confirm the judges in their opinion, so that they will think their verdict was just.
For he who is destroyer of the laws might certainly be regarded as a destroyer of young and thoughtless men.
Will you then avoid the well-governed cities and the most civilized men?
And if you do this will your life be worth living?
Or will you go to them and have the face to carry on — what kind of conversation, Socrates?
The same kind you carried on here, saying that virtue and justice and lawful things and the laws are the most precious things to men?
And do you not think that the conduct of Socrates would seem most disgraceful?
You cannot help thinking so.
Or you will keep away from these places and go to Crito's friends in Thessaly;
for there great disorder and lawlessness prevail, and perhaps they would be amused to hear of the ludicrous way in which you ran away from prison by putting on a disguise, a peasant's leathern cloak or some of the other things in which runaways dress themselves up, and changing your appearance.
But will no one say that you, an old man, who had probably but a short time yet to live, clung to life with such shameless greed that you transgressed the highest laws?
Perhaps not, if you do not offend anyone;
but if you do, Socrates, you will have to listen to many things that would be a disgrace to you.
So you will live as an inferior and a slave to everyone.
And what will you do except feast in Thessaly, as if you had gone to Thessaly to attend a banquet?
What will become of our conversations about justice and virtue?
But perhaps you wish to live for the sake of your children, that you may bring them up and educate them?
How so?
Will you take them to Thessaly to be brought up and educated, making exiles of them, that you may give them that blessing also?
Or perhaps you will not do that, but if they are brought up here while you are living, will they be better brought up and educated if you are not with them than if you were dead?
Oh yes!
your friends will care for them.
Will they care for them if you go away to Thessaly and not if you go away to the dwellings of the dead?
If those who say they are your friends are of any use, we must believe they will care for them in both cases alike.
“Ah, Socrates, be guided by us who tended your infancy.
Care neither for your children nor for life nor for anything else more than for the right, that when you come to the home of the dead, you may have all these things to say in your own defence.
For clearly if you do this thing it will not be better for you here, or more just or holier, no, nor for any of your friends, and neither will it be better when you reach that other abode.
Now, however, you will go away wronged, if you do go away, not by us, the laws, but by men;
but if you escape after so disgracefully requiting wrong with wrong and evil with evil, breaking your compacts and agreements with us, and injuring those whom you least ought to injure — yourself, your friends, your country and us — we shall be angry with you while you live, and there our brothers, the laws in Hades' realm, will not receive you graciously;
Be well assured, my dear friend, Crito, that this is what I seem to hear, as the frenzied dervishes of Cybele seem to hear the flutes, and this sound of these words re-echoes within me and prevents my hearing any other words.
And be assured that, so far as I now believe, if you argue against these words you will speak in vain.
Nevertheless, if you think you can accomplish anything, speak.
Crito.
No, Socrates, I have nothing to say.
Socrates.
Then, Crito, let it be;
and let us act in this way, since it is in this way that God leads us.
